# Summary

Topological Adam is a physics-inspired optimizer that extends the
popular Adam algorithm by introducing a self-regulating energy coupling
mechanism derived from magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) field theory. The
optimizer augments Adam’s adaptive moment updates with two conjugate
auxiliary fields (\(\alpha\) and \(\beta\)) that dynamically balance
gradient energy through a coupling current. This enables more stable and
consistent learning under nonconvex and chaotic optimization conditions.
The implementation is provided as an open-source PyTorch package,
installable via both GitHub and PyPI under the repository name
`topological-adam`.

# Statement of Need

Deep learning optimizers such as Adam, RMSProp, and SGD lack a built-in
mechanism for regulating internal energy or gradient flux. This often
leads to oscillatory or divergent training behavior on highly nonlinear
loss surfaces. Topological Adam addresses this gap by embedding an
internal energy stabilization process inspired by magnetohydrodynamic
coupling, ensuring that the optimizer’s internal “field energy” remains
bounded during learning. This approach provides a new class of
physically interpretable optimizers that can help researchers explore
energy-based learning dynamics, robustness in optimization, and hybrid
physical–computational modeling.

# Method

The optimizer maintains two internal vector fields (\(\alpha\),
\(\beta\)) and computes a coupling current
\(J = (\alpha - \beta) \cdot g\), where \(g\) is the gradient. These
fields exchange energy through a discrete MHD-like coupling rule,
normalized to maintain a target mean energy
\(E_t = \frac{1}{2}\langle \alpha^2 + \beta^2 \rangle\). The parameter
update rule extends Adam as: \[p_{t+1} = p_t - \mathrm{lr}\!\left[
\frac{m_t}{\sqrt{v_t+\varepsilon}} + w_{\text{topo}}\tanh(\alpha_t - \beta_t)
\right],\] where \((m_t, v_t)\) are Adam’s first and second moments. The
additional term introduces a bounded “topological correction” that
stabilizes energy flow across iterations.

# Results

Benchmarks were conducted on MNIST, KMNIST, and CIFAR-10 using a
standard two-layer neural network. Across all datasets, Topological Adam
matched or exceeded Adam’s convergence rate while exhibiting smoother
energy trajectories and reduced gradient variance. In several epochs, it
achieved higher accuracy early in training (notably CIFAR-10 Epochs 1–4)
before reaching similar final performance. The optimizer also
demonstrated improved loss stability and lower internal energy
fluctuations, consistent with its theoretical foundation.

# Acknowledgements

This work was conceived, implemented, and benchmarked by Steven Reid
with the assistance of AI-based tools for documentation and formatting.
Repository: <https://github.com/rrg314/topological-adam>. Archived DOI:
<https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17460708>. PyPI package:
`topological-adam` (maintained under user `rrg314`).

# References
